- Eh bien, mon prince.
Gênes et Lucques ne sont plus que des apanages, des estates, de la famille Buonaparte.
Non, je vous préviens, que si vous ne me dites pas, que nous avons la guerre, si vous vous permettez encore de pallier toutes les infamies, toutes les atrocités de cet Antichrist (ma parole, j'y crois) - je ne vous connais plus, vous n'êtes plus mon ami, vous n'êtes plus my faithful slave, comme vous dites.
Well, hello, hello.
Je vois que je vous fais peur, sit down and talk.
This is what the famous Anna Pavlovna Sherer, a lady-in-waiting and close associate of Empress Maria Feodorovna, spoke in July 1805, when meeting the important and official Prince Vasily, who was the first to come to her evening.
Anna Pavlovna coughed for several days, she had the flu, as she said (flu was then a new word, used only rarely).
In the notes sent out in the morning with the red footman, it was written without distinction in all: “Si vous n'avez rien de mieux à faire, M. le comte (or mon prince), et si la perspective de passer la soirée chez une pauvre malade ne vous effraye pas trop, je serai charmée de vous voir chez moi entre 7 et 10 heures.
Annette Scherer ".
- Dieu, quelle virulente sortie!
- answered, not in the least embarrassed by such a meeting, the prince entered, in a court, embroidered uniform, in stockings, shoes, and stars, with a bright expression of a flat face.
He spoke that exquisite French language, which not only spoke, but also thought our grandfathers, and with those quiet, patronizing intonations that are characteristic of a significant person who has grown old in society and at court.
He went up to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, offering her his perfumed and radiant bald head, and calmly sat down on the sofa.
- Avant tout dites moi, comment vous allez, chère amie?
Calm me down, ”he said, without changing his voice and in a tone in which indifference and even mockery shone through due to decency and sympathy.
- How can you be healthy ...
when do you suffer morally?
Is it possible, having a feeling, to remain calm in our time? - said Anna Pavlovna.
- You all evening with me, I hope?
- And the holiday of the English envoy?
Today is Wednesday.
I have to show myself there, ”said the prince.
- My daughter will pick me up and take me.
- I thought the current holiday was canceled.
Je vous avoue que toutes ces fêtes et tous ces feux d'artifice commencent à devenir insipides.
“If you knew that you wanted it, the holiday would have been canceled,” said the prince, out of habit, like a clock, saying things that he didn’t want to be believed.
- Ne me tourmentez pas.
Eh bien, qu'a-t-on décidé par rapport à la dépêche de Novosilzoff?
Vous savez tout.
- How can I tell you? - said the prince in a cold, bored tone.
- Qu'a-t-on décidé?
On a décidé que Buonaparte a brûlé ses vaisseaux, et je crois que nous sommes en train de brûler les notres.
- Prince Vasily always spoke lazily, as an actor speaks the role of an old play.
Anna Pavlovna Sherer, on the contrary, despite her forty years, was full of animation and impulses.
To be an enthusiast became her social position, and sometimes, when she did not even want to, she, in order not to deceive the expectations of people who knew her, became an enthusiast.
The restrained smile that constantly played on Anna Pavlovna's face, although it did not go to her obsolete features, expressed, like spoiled children, the constant consciousness of her sweet flaw, from which she does not want, cannot and does not find it necessary to correct.
In the middle of a conversation about political actions, Anna Pavlovna flared up.
- Oh, don't tell me about Austria!
I don’t understand anything, maybe, but Austria never wanted and does not want war.
She betrays us.
Russia alone should be the savior of Europe.
Our benefactor knows his high calling and will be faithful to it.
This is one thing I believe in.
Our kind and wonderful sovereign will have the greatest role in the world, and he is so virtuous and good that God will not leave him, and he will fulfill his calling to crush the hydra of the revolution, which is now even more terrible in the person of this murderer and villain.
We alone must atone for the blood of the righteous.
Who can we hope for, I ask you? ..
England with its commercial spirit does not understand and cannot understand the full height of the soul of Emperor Alexander.
She refused to clear Malta.
She wants to see, is looking for an afterthought of our actions.
What did they say to Novosiltsov? ..
Nothing.
They did not understand, they cannot understand the selflessness of our emperor, who wants nothing for himself and wants everything for the good of the world.
And what did they promise?
Nothing.
And what they promised, and that will not happen!
Prussia has already declared that Bonaparte is invincible and that all of Europe can do nothing against him ...
And I do not believe in a single word of either Hardenberg or Gaugwitz.
Cette fameuse neutralité prussienne, ce n'est qu'un piège.
I believe in one God and in the high destiny of our dear emperor.
He will save Europe! ..
She suddenly stopped with a smile of mockery at her fervor.
“I think,” said the prince, smiling, “that if you were sent instead of our dear Vincennerode, you would have taken the consent of the Prussian king by storm.
You are so eloquent.
Will you give me some tea?
- Now.
A propos, ”she added, calming down again,“ today I have two very interesting people, le vicomte de Mortemart, il est allié aux Montmorency par les Rohans, one of the best surnames in France.
This is one of the good immigrants, real ones.
And then l'abbé Morio: do you know this deep mind?
He was received by the sovereign.
You know?
- A!
I will be very glad, - said the prince.
`` Tell me, '' he added, as if just remembering something and especially carelessly, while what he asked about was the main purpose of his visit, `` it is true that l'impératrice-mère wishes Baron Funke to be appointed first secretary to Vienna?
C'est un pauvre sire, ce baron, à ce qu'il paraît.
- Prince Vasily wanted to assign his son to this place, which they tried to deliver to the baron through Empress Maria Feodorovna.
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes as a sign that neither she nor anyone else could judge what the empress liked or liked.
“Monsieur le baron de Funke a été recommandé à l'impératrice-mère par sa soeur,” she only said in a sad, dry tone.
While Anna Pavlovna named the empress, her face suddenly presented a deep and sincere expression of devotion and respect, combined with sadness, which happened to her every time she mentioned her high patroness in a conversation.
She said that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke a beaucoup d’estime, and again her gaze was shaken with sadness.
The prince fell silent indifferently.
Anna Pavlovna, with her characteristic courtly and female dexterity and speed of tact, wanted to snap the prince because he dared to say so about the person recommended to the empress, and at the same time to console him.
“Mais à propos de votre famille,” she said, “do you know that your daughter, since she leaves, fait les délices de tout le monde.
On la trouve belle, comme le jour.
The prince bent down in respect and gratitude.
“I often think,” Anna Pavlovna continued after a moment's silence, moving closer to the prince and smiling affectionately at him, as if showing by this that political and social conversations were over and now a sincere one was beginning: “I often think how the happiness of life is sometimes unfairly distributed.
Why did fate give you such two glorious children (excluding Anatole, your youngest, I don’t love him, ”she put in categorically, raising her eyebrows) - such lovely children?
And you, truly, value them least of all and therefore do not deserve them.
And she smiled with her enthusiastic smile.
- Que voulez-vous?
Lafater aurait dit que je n'ai pas la bosse de la paternité, said the prince.
- Stop joking.
I wanted to have a serious talk with you.
You know, I'm not happy with your younger son.
Between us, be it said (her face took on a sad expression), they talked about him at Her Majesty and they pity you ...
The prince did not answer, but she silently, looking significantly at him, waited for an answer.
Prince Vasily winced.
- What should I do? He said finally.
“You know, I did everything a father could to educate them, and both came out des imbéciles.
Hippolyte is at least a deceased fool, and Anatole is restless.
Here is one difference, ”he said, smiling more unnaturally and animatedly than usual, and at the same time showing especially sharply in the wrinkles that had formed around his mouth something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.
- And why will children be born to people like you?
If you were not a father, I would not be able to reproach you for anything, ”said Anna Pavlovna, looking up thoughtfully.
- Je suie votre the faithful slave, et à vous seule je puis l'avouer.
My children are ce sont les entraves de mon existence.
This is my cross.
I explain it to myself.
Que voulez vous? ..
- He paused, expressing with a gesture his obedience to cruel fate.
Anna Pavlovna pondered.
- You have never thought about marrying your prodigal son Anatole.
They say, she said, that the old girls are ont la manie des mariages.
I do not yet feel this weakness behind me, but I have one petite personne who is very unhappy with her father, une parente à nous, une princesse Bolkonskaya.
- Prince Vasily did not answer, although with the speed of thought and memory characteristic of secular people, he showed with a movement of his head that he had taken this information into consideration.
“No, you know that this Anatole costs me 40,000 a year,” he said, apparently unable to keep the sad train of his thoughts.
He paused.
- What will happen in five years if it goes like this?
Voilà l'avantage d'être père.
Is she rich, your princess?
- Father is very rich and stingy.
He lives in the village.
You know, this famous prince Bolkonsky, dismissed during the reign of the late emperor and nicknamed "the Prussian king."
He is a very intelligent man, but odd and heavy.
La pauvre petite est malheureuse, comme les pierres.
She has a brother who recently married Lise Meinen, Kutuzov's adjutant.
He will be with me today.
- Ecoutez, chère Annette, - said the prince, suddenly taking his interlocutor by the hand and bending it down for some reason, - Arrangez-moi cette affaire et je suis votre the most faithful slave à tout jamais (pan, comme mon head m'écrit des reports : rest-er-p).
She is of a good surname and rich.
Everything I need.
And he, with those free and familiar, graceful movements that distinguished him, took the maid of honor by the hand, kissed her and, kissing, waved the maid of honor, lounging in the armchairs and looking away.
“Attendez,” said Anna Pavlovna, thinking.
- Today I will speak Lise (la femme du jeune Bolkonsky).
And maybe it will work out.
Ce sera dans votre famille, que je ferai mon apprentissage de vieille fille.
Anna Pavlovna's drawing room began to fill up little by little.
The highest nobility of St. Petersburg arrived, people of the most heterogeneous age and character, but the same in the society in which they all lived; the daughter of Prince Vasily arrived, the beautiful Helen, who had stopped by for her father to go with him to the envoy's holiday.
She was wearing a cipher and a ball gown.
Known as la femme la plus séduisante de Pétersbourg, the young, little princess Bolkonskaya, who got married last winter and now did not go out into the big world because of her pregnancy, also came to visit, but went on small evenings.
Prince Ippolit, the son of Prince Vasily, arrived with Mortemar, whom he introduced; Abbot Morio and many others also arrived.
- You have not seen yet, or: - Are you not familiar with ma tante?
- Anna Pavlovna said to the visiting guests and very seriously led them to a little old woman in high bows, who swam out of the other room, as soon as guests began to arrive, she called them by name, slowly shifting her eyes from the guest to ma tante, and then walked away.
All the guests performed the ceremony of greeting the unknown, uninteresting and unnecessary aunt.
Anna Pavlovna with sad, solemn participation followed their greetings, silently approving them.
Ma tante spoke to everyone in the same terms about his health, about her health and about the health of Her Majesty, which, thank God, was better today.
All those who approached, out of decency without showing haste, with a feeling of relief from the heavy duty they had fulfilled, left the old woman so that they would never come to her all evening.
The young princess Bolkonskaya arrived with work in an embroidered gold velvet sack.
Her pretty, with a slightly blackened mustache, the upper lip was short across the teeth, but the lovelier it opened and the lovelier it sometimes stretched out and sank onto the lower one.
As is always the case with quite attractive women, her lack - the shortness of her lips and a half-open mouth - seemed to be her special, her own beauty.
It was fun for everyone to look at this pretty mother-to-be, full of health and liveliness, who so easily endured her position.
It seemed to old people and bored, gloomy young people that they themselves were becoming like her, having spent some time talking with her.
Whoever spoke to her and saw at every word her bright smile and shiny white teeth, which were seen incessantly, thought that he was especially kind today.
And everyone thought that.
The little princess, waddling over, with small quick steps walked around the table with a work bag on her hand and, merrily straightening her dress, sat down on the sofa, near the silver samovar, as if everything she did was partie de plaisir for her and for everyone around her.
“J'ai apporté mon ouvrage,” she said, unrolling her reticule and addressing everyone together.
“Look, Annette, ne me jouez pas un mauvais tour,” she turned to the hostess.
- Vous m'avez écrit, que c'était une toute petite soirée; voyez, comme je suis attifée.
And she threw up her hands to show her, in lace, graceful gray dress, belted slightly below the breasts with a wide ribbon.
- Soyez tranquille, Lise, vous serez toujours la plus jolie, answered Anna Pavlovna.
“Vous savez, mon mari m'abandonne,” she continued in the same tone, addressing the general, “il va se faire tuer.
Dites moi, pourquoi cette vilaine guerre, '' she said to Prince Vasily and, without waiting for an answer, turned to the daughter of Prince Vasily, to the beautiful Helene.
- Quelle délicieuse personne, que cette petite princesse! - said Prince Vasily quietly to Anna Pavlovna.
Soon after the little princess entered a massive, fat young man with a bobbed head, glasses, light pantaloons in the fashion of the time, with a high frill and a brown tailcoat.
This fat young man was the illegitimate son of the famous Catherine grandee, Count Bezukhov, who was now dying in Moscow.
He has not served anywhere yet, just arrived from abroad, where he was brought up, and was for the first time in society.
Anna Pavlovna greeted him with a bow, referring to the people of the lowest hierarchy in her salon.
But despite this inferior greeting, at the sight of Pierre entering, Anna Pavlovna's face displayed anxiety and fear, similar to that which is expressed at the sight of something too huge and unusual for a place.
Although, indeed, Pierre was somewhat larger than the other men in the room, this fear could only relate to that smart and at the same time timid, observant and natural look that distinguished him from everyone in this living room.
“C’est bien aimable à vous, monsieur Pierre, d’être venu voir une pauvre malade,” Anna Pavlovna told him, looking at her aunt with fear, to whom she was leading him.
Pierre muttered something incomprehensible and continued to search for something with his eyes.
He happily, cheerfully smiled, bowing to the little princess, as if he were a close acquaintance, and went up to his aunt.
Anna Pavlovna's fear was not in vain, because Pierre, not listening to his aunt's speech about her Majesty's health, left her.
Anna Pavlovna frightenedly stopped him with the words: - Do you know Abbot Morio?
he is a very interesting person ... - she said.
- Yes, I heard about his plan for eternal peace, and it is very interesting, but hardly possible ...
"Do you think ...?" Said Anna Pavlovna, to say something and again turn to her studies as a mistress of the house, but Pierre did the opposite impoliteness.
Before, he left without hearing the words of the interlocutor; now he stopped by his conversation the interlocutor who needed to leave him.
He, bending his head and spreading his large legs, began to prove to Anna Pavlovna why he believed that the abbot's plan was a chimera.
“We’ll talk later,” said Anna Pavlovna, smiling.
And, having got rid of the young man who did not know how to live, she returned to her mistress of the house and continued to listen and look closely, ready to help at the point where the conversation weakened.
As the owner of the spinning workshop, having seated the workers in their places, walks through the establishment, noticing the immobility or the unusual, creaking, too loud sound of the spindle, hurrying, holding it back or setting it in the proper course, so Anna Pavlovna, walking around her living room, approached to a circle that had stopped talking or talked too much and, with one word or movement, again started a uniform, decent talking machine.
But among these worries, everything was visible in her, a special fear for Pierre.
She looked at him with concern as he went up to listen to what was being said about Mortemar, and went to another circle where the abbot was talking.
For Pierre, brought up abroad, this evening of Anna Pavlovna was the first that he saw in Russia.
He knew that the entire intelligentsia of St. Petersburg was gathered here, and his eyes were dizzy like a child in a toy shop.
He was still afraid to miss the clever conversations he might hear.
Looking at the confident and graceful expressions of the faces gathered here, he kept expecting something particularly clever.
Finally, he approached Morio.
The conversation seemed interesting to him, and he stopped, waiting for an opportunity to express his thoughts, as young people like it.
Anna Pavlovna's evening was started.
The spindles from different sides evenly and incessantly made noise.
Except for ma tante, near which sat only one elderly lady with a tear-stained, thin face, somewhat stranger in this brilliant society, the society was divided into three circles.
In one, more masculine, the center was the abbot; in another, young, the beautiful Princess Helene, the daughter of Prince Vasily, and the pretty, ruddy, too plump in her youth, little Princess Bolkonskaya.
In the third, Mortemar and Anna Pavlovna.
The Viscount was a handsome young man, with gentle features and methods, who obviously considered himself a celebrity, but, out of good manners, modestly left himself to be used by the society in which he found himself.
Anna Pavlovna, obviously, treated her guests to them.
Just as a good meter-d'hotel serves as something supernaturally beautiful that piece of beef that you don't want to eat if you see it in a dirty kitchen, so this evening Anna Pavlovna served her guests first the viscount, then the abbot, as something supernaturally refined ...
In Mortemar's circle they immediately started talking about the murder of the Duke of Enghien.
The Viscount said that the Duke of Enghien died of his magnanimity, and that there were special reasons for Bonaparte's anger.
- Ah! voyons.
Contez-nous cela, vicomte, - said Anna Pavlovna, happily feeling like something à la Louis XV
     echoed this phrase, - contez-nous cela, vicomte.
The Viscount bowed in obedience and smiled politely.
Anna Pavlovna made a circle around the viscount and invited everyone to listen to his story.
“Le vicomte a été personnellement connu de monseigneur,” Anna Pavlovna whispered to one.
“Le vicomte est un parfait conteur,” she said to the other.
“Comme on voit l’homme de la bonne compagnie,” she said to the third; and the viscount was served to society in the most elegant and favorable light for it, like roast beef on a hot dish, sprinkled with herbs.
The Viscount was about to begin his story and smiled thinly.
“Come over here, chère Hélène,” Anna Pavlovna said to the beautiful princess, who was sitting at a distance, forming the center of another circle.
Princess Helene smiled; she rose with the same unchanging smile of a quite beautiful woman with whom she entered the drawing-room.
Slightly rustling with her white ballroom robe, trimmed with ivy and moss, and shining with the whiteness of her shoulders, the gloss of her hair and diamonds, she walked between the parted men and straight, not looking at anyone, but smiling to everyone and as if graciously giving everyone the right to admire the beauty of their camp , full of shoulders, very open, in the fashion of the time, chest and back, and as if bringing with her the brilliance of a ball, she went up to Anna Pavlovna.
Helene was so good that not only was there not even a shadow of coquetry in her, but, on the contrary, she seemed to be ashamed of her undoubted and too strong and victoriously acting beauty.
She seemed to want and could not diminish the effect of her beauty.
- Quelle belle personne!
said everyone who saw her.
As if struck by something extraordinary, the viscount shrugged his shoulders and lowered his eyes while she sat down in front of him and illuminated him with the same invariable smile.
“Madame, je crains pour mes moyens devant un pareil auditoire,” he said, tilting his head with a smile.
The princess leaned her open, full hand on the table and did not find it necessary to say anything.
She waited, smiling.
Throughout the story, she sat upright, glancing now and then at her full, beautiful hand, which was lying lightly on the table, now at her even more beautiful chest, on which she was straightening a diamond necklace; She straightened the folds of her dress several times and, when the story made an impression, looked back at Anna Pavlovna and immediately assumed the same expression that was on the lady's face, and then again calmed down in a radiant smile.
After Helene, the little princess also passed from the tea table.
“Attendez moi, je vais prendre mon ouvrage,” she said.
- Voyons, à quoi pensez-vous? - she turned to Prince Hippolytus: - apportez-moi mon ridicule.
The princess, smiling and talking to everyone, suddenly made a rearrangement and, sitting down, recovered cheerfully.
“Now I'm fine,” she said, and, asking to start, set to work.
Prince Hippolyte carried her reticule, went over to her, and, drawing a chair close to her, sat down beside her.
Le charmant Hippolyte struck by his extraordinary resemblance to his beautiful sister, and even more so by the fact that, despite the resemblance, he was strikingly foolish.
His facial features were the same as those of his sister, but in the latter everything was illuminated with a cheerful, self-satisfied, young, invariable smile and an extraordinary, antique beauty of the body; on the other hand, the brother's face was clouded with idiocy and invariably expressed self-confident grumpiness, and the body was thin and weak.
Eyes, nose, mouth - everything seemed to shrink into one vague and boring grimace, and arms and legs always took an unnatural position.
- Ce n'est pas une histoire de revenants?
- he said, sitting down beside the princess and hastily attaching his lorgnette to his eyes, as if without this instrument he could not begin to speak.
“Mais non, mon cher,” the surprised narrator said with a shrug.
“C’est que je déteste les histoires de revenants,” said Prince Hippolytus in a tone that was evident, “he said these words, and then he already understood what they meant.
Because of the self-confidence with which he spoke, no one could understand whether what he said was very clever or very stupid.
He was in a dark green tailcoat, in pantaloons of the color cuisse de nymphe effrayée, as he himself said, in stockings and shoes.
Vicomte told very nicely about the anecdote that was then circulating that the Duke of Enghien had secretly traveled to Paris to meet with Madame George, and that there he met Bonaparte, who also enjoyed the favors of the famous actress, and that there, having met the Duke, Napoleon accidentally fell into the swoon to which he was subject, and was in the power of the duke, which the duke did not take advantage of, but that Bonaparte subsequently avenged the duke with death for this generosity.

The story was very sweet and interesting, especially in the place where the rivals suddenly recognize each other, and the ladies seemed to be in excitement.
“Charmant,” said Anna Pavlovna, looking inquiringly at the little princess.
“Charmant,” the little princess whispered, sticking a needle into her work, as if to signal that the interest and charm of the story prevented her from continuing her work.
The Viscount appreciated this tacit praise and, smiling gratefully, went on; but at this time Anna Pavlovna, who kept looking at the young man who was terrible for her, noticed that he was talking something too hotly and loudly with the abbot, and hastened to help the dangerous place.
Indeed, Pierre managed to strike up a conversation with the abbot about political equilibrium, and the abbot, apparently interested in the young man's innocent ardor, developed his favorite idea in front of him.
Both listened and spoke too animatedly and naturally, and Anna Pavlovna did not like this.
“The remedy is European equilibrium and droit des gens,” said the abbot.
- Should one powerful state like Russia, glorified for barbarism, become disinterestedly at the head of an alliance aimed at balancing Europe - and it will save the world!
- How do you find such a balance? - Pierre began; but at that time Anna Pavlovna came up and, glancing sternly at Pierre, asked the Italian about how he endured the local climate.
The Italian's face suddenly changed and took on an insulting feigned, sweet expression, which, apparently, was accustomed to him in conversation with women.
“I am so fascinated by the delights of the mind and education of society, especially women, into which I had the good fortune to be accepted, that I have not yet had time to think about the climate,” he said.
Without letting out the abbot and Pierre, Anna Pavlovna, for the convenience of observation, joined them to the general circle.
At this time, a new face entered the living room.
The new face was the young prince Andrei Bolkonsky, the husband of the little princess.
Prince Bolkonsky was of short stature, a very handsome young man with definite and dry features.
Everything in his figure, from a tired, bored gaze to a quiet, measured step, represented the starkest opposition to his little, lively wife.
Apparently, all those who were in the living room were not only familiar to him, but he was so tired of him that he was very bored to look at them and listen to them.
Of all the faces that bored him, the face of his pretty wife seemed to bore him the most.
With a grimace that ruined his handsome face, he turned away from her.
He kissed Anna Pavlovna's hand and, squinting, looked around the whole society.
- Vous vous enrôlez pour la guerre, mon prince?
- said Anna Pavlovna.
- Le général Koutouzoff, - said Bolkonsky, striking the last syllable zoff, like a Frenchman, - a bien voulu de moi pour aide-de-camp ... - Et Lise, votre femme?
- She will go to the village.
- How is it not a sin for you to deprive us of your lovely wife?
“André,” his wife said, addressing her husband in the same flirtatious tone as she addressed to strangers, “what a story the viscount told us about Madame Georges and Bonaparte!
Prince Andrew closed his eyes and turned away.
Pierre, from the time Prince Andrew entered the drawing-room, had not taken off his joyful, friendly eyes, went up to him and took his hand.
Prince Andrew, without looking back, wrinkled his face into a grimace, expressing annoyance at the one who touches his hand, but seeing Pierre's smiling face, he smiled with an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
- That's how! ..
And you are in the big world! He said to Pierre.
- I knew that you would be, - Pierre answered.
“I’ll come to supper with you,” he added quietly, so as not to disturb the viscount, who continued his story.
- Can?
“No, you can't,” said Prince Andrei laughing, shaking his hand letting Pierre know that there was no need to ask this.
He wanted to say something else, but at that time Prince Vasily got up with his daughter, and the men stood up to give them a way.
“Excuse me, my dear Viscount,” said Prince Vasily to the Frenchman, gently pulling him by the sleeve down to the chair so that he would not get up.
“This unfortunate holiday at the messenger’s place deprives me of pleasure and interrupts you.
I am very sad to leave your delightful evening, ”he said to Anna Pavlovna.
His daughter, Princess Helene, slightly holding the folds of her dress, walked between the chairs, and her smile shone even brighter on her beautiful face.
Pierre looked with almost frightened, enthusiastic eyes at this beauty as she passed him.
“Very good,” said Prince Andrew.
“Very much,” said Pierre.
Passing by, Prince Vasily grabbed Pierre by the hand and turned to Anna Pavlovna.
“Form this bear for me,” he said.
- Here he has been living with me for a month, and for the first time I see him in the light.
Nothing is so necessary for the young.
to a person as a society of smart women.